Server validation with a validator component upgrade (#37113)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/blazor/forms/validation.md

Built-in validation also supports [custom validation attributes](xref:mvc/models/validation#custom-attributes).

For more information, see <xref:fundamentals/minimal-apis#enable-built-in-validation-support-for-minimal-apis>.

:::moniker-end

## Remote validation with a validator component

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-10.0"

*This section demonstrates remote validation using a Blazor Web App (global Interactive Auto render mode) and a Minimal API.*

Remote validation is supported in addition to Blazor Web App client/server-side validation:

* Process client validation in the form with the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Forms.DataAnnotationsValidator> component.
* When the form passes client validation (<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Forms.EditForm.OnValidSubmit> is called), send the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Forms.EditContext.Model?displayProperty=nameWithType> to a backend Minimal API for remote validation.
* Process remote model validation:
  * Data annotations validation with built-in support for Minimal APIs.
  * Custom validation logic.
* Send validation errors, if any, back to the client.

> * Either disable the form on success or display the errors, allowing the user to correct any problems with the form's field values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Either disable the form on success or display the errors so that the user can correct any problems with the form's field values.
```
Very minor: Reads a little better this way.

                "/starship-validation", starship);

            if (response.IsSuccessStatusCode)
            {
                var deserializedResponseContent = 
                    await response.Content.ReadFromJsonAsync
                        <IDictionary<string, string[]>>();

                return deserializedResponseContent ?? genericError;
            }
        }
        catch (Exception ex)
        {
            // Log exception
        }

        return genericError;
    }
}
```

Confirm or update the namespace of the preceding class.

Create a `Starship` folder in the server project of the Blazor Web App.

In the Blazor Web App, create a server form validator that implements the `IFormValidation` interface. Place the server form validator class in the server-side `Starship` folder. The server form validator is used when the Blazor Web App is running on the server. The validator class posts the form's model to the backend Minimal API for processing.

`Starship/ServerFormValidation.cs`:

```csharp
using System.Net;
using System.Net.Http.Headers;
using System.Text.Json;
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authentication;

> using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
The class only uses `ComponentBase`, `EditContext`, `ValidationMessageStore`, and `EditForm`, all from the Components namespaces. The MVC using is unused as far as I can see and should be removed.  Maybe I'm missing something.

Author: `ValidationProblemDetails` on Line 582 requires the namespace.

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.mvc.validationproblemdetails

I couldn't find it in any other package, and @oroztocil can probably confirm if it's available from any other source. The app could also host its own to avoid having to use that package. I appeal to @oroztocil to decide.

Of course, I'm still waiting to hear back what we're doing with this section. I like the section (if it's coded correctly for this scenario). I think it would save devs trying to implement this a lot of time and frustration. However, @oroztocil (and of course, @danroth27) are better judges of that. We might be dropping this entire section. If we keep it tho ... AFAICT ... the MVC package is needed here for the use of `ValidationProblemDetails`.

                message = "The form has been processed.";
            }
        }
        catch (AccessTokenNotAvailableException ex)
        {
            ex.Redirect();
        }
        catch (Exception ex)
        {
            Logger.LogError(ex, "Form processing error.");
            disabled = true;
            messageStyles = "color:red";
            message = "There was an error processing the form.";
        }
    }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> As an alternative to the use of a [validation component](#validator-components), custom data annotation validation attributes can be used. Custom attributes applied to the form's model activate with the use of the <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Forms.DataAnnotationsValidator> component. For more information, see the [Custom validation attributes](#custom-validation-attributes) section.

To reach the form easily, add the following entry to the `NavMenu` component (`Layout/NavMenu.razor`) in the `.Client` project:

```razor
<div class="nav-item px-3">
    <NavLink class="nav-link" href="starship-10">
        <span class="bi bi-list-nested-nav-menu" aria-hidden="true"></span> Starship
    </NavLink>
</div>
```

> When automatic model binding validation error occurs on the server, the framework returns a [default bad request response](xref:web-api/index#default-badrequest-response) with a <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ValidationProblemDetails>. The response contains more data than just the validation errors, as shown in the following example when all of the fields of the `Starfleet Starship Database` form aren't submitted and the form fails validation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When automatic model binding validation fails on the server, the framework returns a [default bad request response](xref:web-api/index#default-badrequest-response) with a <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.ValidationProblemDetails>. The response contains more data than just the validation errors, as shown in the following example when all of the fields of the `Starfleet Starship Database` form aren't submitted and the form fails validation:
```
Very minor: Fixes missing article / subject-verb agreement, reads a bit better, and matches the described 400 behavior.

    "Classification": ["The Classification field is required."],
    "IsValidatedDesign": ["This form disallows unapproved ships."],
    "MaximumAccommodation": ["Accommodation invalid (1-100000)."]
  }
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> To demonstrate the preceding JSON responses, you must either disable the form's client validation to permit empty field form submission or use a tool to send a request directly to the Minimal API, such as [Firefox Browser Developer](https://www.mozilla.org/firefox/developer/).

If automatic type validation passes but the custom validation fails, the following JSON response is received from the Minimal API:

```json
{
    "type": "https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9110#section-15.5.1",
    "title": "One or more validation errors occurred.",
    "instance": "MinimalApiJwt",
    "status": 400,
    "errors": {
      "Description": ["For a 'Defense' ship, 'Description' is required."]
    }
}
```

:::moniker-end

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-8.0 < aspnetcore-10.0"

*This section is focused on Blazor Web App scenarios, but the approach for any type of app that uses server-side validation with web API adopts the same general approach.*

> Remote validation is supported in addition to Blazor Web App client/server-side validation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remote validation is supported in addition to Blazor Web App client-side and server-side validation:
```
Very minor: Was not clear if "-side" applies to both, better I think to clarify and generaly avoid slashes in prose when we can.

:::moniker range=">= aspnetcore-10.0"

## Server validation for Minimal APIs

In a [Minimal API](xref:fundamentals/minimal-apis), call the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.ValidationServiceCollectionExtensions.AddValidation%2A> extension method for [data annotation validation of model types](xref:mvc/models/validation#validation-attributes) for all web API endpoints:

```csharp
builder.Services.AddValidation();
```

The implementation automatically discovers types that are defined in Minimal API handlers or as base types of types defined in Minimal API handlers. An endpoint filter performs validation on these types and is added for each endpoint.

Built-in validation also supports [custom validation attributes](xref:mvc/models/validation#custom-attributes).

For more information, see <xref:fundamentals/minimal-apis#enable-built-in-validation-support-for-minimal-apis>.

:::moniker-end

> ## Server validation with a validator component

Reviewer 2: This example still seems overly complex. I appreciate the work that went into this but I am a big fan of docs that are minimal in showing only what is specific for the scenario being taught and omitting custom infrastructure and ceremonies.

First, can we find a different name for this section? I know there are precedents in the docs but I would move away from calling this "server validation". Maybe "remote validation"? The pattern here is basically what the MVC's `Remote` validation attribute did, only with more manual plumbing. Also, where is the validator component mentioned in the title? The `ClientValidation` class is just a wrapper for the message store.

Second, can we reorder the sections in the long Blazor forma validation article so that the docs flow from the most basic/standard/default scenarios to the more advanced/custom ones? For typical Blazor apps the order of complexity is roughly:

1. Built-in validation rules using validation attributes and a `DataAnnotationsValidator` inside `EditForm`.
2. Custom validation rules using custom validation attributes or `IValidatableObject` and a `DataAnnotationsValidator` inside `EditForm`.
3. Information about `AddValidation`.
5. Custom validation logic using the API of `EditForm` and `EditContext`.
6. Only then something like this.

Thinking about it more, it might help us to break up this long article into one that cover 1-3 and another covering 5-6.

`Starship/StarshipModel.cs` (Blazor Web App) or `Models/StarshipModel.cs` (Minimal API project):

```csharp
using System.ComponentModel.DataAnnotations;

namespace {NAMESPACE};

public class StarshipModel
{
    [Required]
    [StringLength(16, ErrorMessage = "Identifier too long (16 character limit).")]
    public string? Id { get; set; }

    public string? Description { get; set; }

    [Required]
    public string? Classification { get; set; }

    [Range(1, 100000, ErrorMessage = "Accommodation invalid (1-100000).")]
    public int MaximumAccommodation { get; set; }

    [Required]
    [Range(typeof(bool), "true", "true", ErrorMessage = "Approval required.")]
    public bool IsValidatedDesign { get; set; }

    [Required]
    public DateTime ProductionDate { get; set; }
}
```

Add an interface for a form validation service to the `.Client` project in the `Starship` folder. The interface is used to register a service for server validation on the server or client validation on the client.

> `Starship/IFormValidator.cs`:

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to have the `IFormValidator` and the two implementations? If nothing else, the naming `*Validator` may confuse people who are accustomed to the `DataAnnotationValidator` (which is a component they insert into `EditForm`).

`Starship/ServerFormValidator.cs`:

```csharp
using System.Net;
using System.Net.Http.Headers;
using System.Text.Json;
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authentication;
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;
using BlazorSample.Client.Starship;

namespace BlazorSample.Starship;

internal sealed class ServerFormValidator(
    IHttpContextAccessor httpContextAccessor, IHttpClientFactory httpClientFactory) 
    : IFormValidator
{
    public async Task<IDictionary<string, string[]>> ValidateStarshipFormAsync(
        StarshipModel starship)
    {
        Dictionary<string, string[]> genericError = new()
        {
            {
                "Validation Error",
                ["An unexpected server error occurred during validation."]
            }
        };

        try
        {
            if (httpContextAccessor.HttpContext is null)
            {
                throw new Exception("HttpContext not available");
            }

>             var request = new HttpRequestMessage(HttpMethod.Post, 

Reviewer 2: Why is the Server project delegating to a Minimal API endpoint if it can invoke the custom validation code directly? We could get rid of all the code involvingc `IHttpContextAccessor`, token passing, JSON de/seralization, and so on.

In the `Program` file of the Minimal API project:

```csharp
app.MapPost("/api-starship-validation", (
    StarshipModel model, ILogger<Program> logger) =>
{
    Dictionary<string, string[]> errors = [];

    if (model.Classification == "Defense" && string.IsNullOrEmpty(model.Description))
    {
        errors.Add(nameof(model.Description), 
            ["For a 'Defense' ship, 'Description' is required."]);
    }

    if (errors.Count > 0)
    {
        return Results.ValidationProblem(
            errors: errors,
            detail: "One or more validation errors occurred.",
            instance: typeof(Program).Assembly.GetName().Name,
            title: "Validation Errors",
            type: "https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9110#section-15.5.1");
    }

    return Results.NoContent();

}).RequireAuthorization();
```

Also in the `Program` file of the Minimal API, register [built-in validation services](xref:fundamentals/minimal-apis#validation-support-in-minimal-apis):

```csharp
builder.Services.AddValidation();
```

> Built-in validation automatically intercepts the endpoint request and validates the types that the endpoint receives. If the model fails validation, the framework returns a *400 - Bad Request* response with error details without executing the endpoint's code.

Reviewer 2: Probably better to not mix the standard validation pattern with `AddValidation` and `DataAnnotations` validation attributes with the custom validation. Or if the intention is exactly to show how the custom validation can be added on top of the built-in one, then call this out explicitly somewhere here.

In the `.Client` project, add the following `CustomValidation` component. When the component's `DisplayErrors` method is called with a set of validation errors, the errors are added to the parent component's edit context validation message store. Errors are cleared from the edit context by calling the `ClearErrors` method.

`CustomValidation.cs`:

```csharp
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components;
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Components.Forms;
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc;

namespace BlazorSample.Client;

> public class CustomValidation : ComponentBase

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to introduce the `ClientValidation` class that wraps work with the message store?

Author: ***Yes!*** 😄 ... However, you're describing API for .NET 11, correct? Therefore, we'd still do what we're showing here for .NET 10 or earlier. I opened #37366 to trail this PR for changing this over to use the `ClientValidation` class for .NET 11 or later (and the *Validator component* section can be dropped for .NET 11 or later).

Reviewer 2: If you are referring to the [client-side validation feature](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/blazor/forms/validation?view=aspnetcore-11.0#client-side-validation-in-static-ssr-forms) released in Preview 5, that is for static SSR, while this tutorial is for interactive mode.

That said, renaming the class to `CustomValidation` reduces the confusion.

Author: I updated the issue to clarify that we'd be adding remarks on the `ClientValidation` class for client-side validation under static SSR. I'm not sure where/how it will affect the current coverage, but I'll analyze it when I reach that issue.
